---
title: "Use pyenv to manage Python versions"
date: 2023-09-25T10:06:07+08:00
tags: ["Python"]
---

During development, you may require different Python versions for various projects. For example, you might need Python 3.6 for one project and Python 3.10 for another. Instead of installing different Python versions on your system, you can use pyenv to manage multiple Python versions.
<!--more-->

# Install pyenv

You can see the instructions from the [official website](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv#getting-pyenv). Take MacOS as an example, you can install pyenv with Homebrew:

```bash
brew update
brew install pyenv
```

After installation, you need to add the following lines to your shell profile file (e.g. `~/.zshrc`):

```bash
echo 'export PYENV_ROOT="$HOME/.pyenv"' >> ~/.zshrc
echo 'command -v pyenv >/dev/null || export PATH="$PYENV_ROOT/bin:$PATH"' >> ~/.zshrc
echo 'eval "$(pyenv init -)"' >> ~/.zshrc
```

Restart your shell, and you can use `pyenv` command now.

```bash
exec "$SHELL"

pyenv version
```

# Install python version

You can use `pyenv install -l` to list all available Python versions. For example, you can install python 3.10 with the following command:

```bash
pyenv install 3.10
```

You can use `pyenv versions` (do not forget the `s`) to list all installed python version.

# Switch python version

To specify a Python version for a project, use the pyenv local command. For instance, to enable Python 3.10 for the current directory, use the following command:

```bash
pyenv local 3.10
```

In the current directory, you'll find a file named .python-version containing the specified Python version. When you use the which python command, you'll observe that 'python' is using the version you've specified.

```bash
which python
```

With the setting above, you can create a virtual environment and use this environment to install project dependencies with the following command:

```bash
python -m venv .venv
. .venv/bin/activate

which python # You will see it is using the python in the virtual environment.
# pip install ... 
```

Similarly, if a project requires a different Python version, install it using pyenv and create a virtual environment for the project as needed. 
